
.Dd December 2008
.Dt CKSUM 1

.Sh NAME

.Nm cksum
.Nd write file checksums and sizes

.Sh SYNOPSIS

.Nm cksum
.Ar file...

.Sh DESCRIPTION
The cksum utility calculates and writes to standard output a cyclic
redundancy check (CRC) for each input file, and also write to standard output
the number of octets in each file. The CRC used is based on the polynomial
used for CRC error checking in the ISO/IEC 8802-3:1996 standard (Ethernet).

.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It file
A pathname of a file to be checked. If no file operands are specified,
the standard input is used.
.El

.Sh STDIN
The standard input is used only if no file operands are specified.
See the INPUT FILES section.

.Sh INPUT FILES
The input files can be any file type.

.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variables affect the execution of cksum:
.Bl -tag -width
.It LANG
Provide a default value for the internationalization variables that
are unset or null. (See the Base Definitions volume of IEEE Std 1003.1-2001,
Section 8.2, Internationalization Variables for the precedence of
internationalization variables used to determine the values of locale
categories.)
.It LC_ALL
If set to a non-empty string value, override the values of all the
other internationalization variables.
.It LC_CTYPE
Determine the locale for the interpretation of sequences of bytes of
text data as characters (for example, single-byte as opposed to multi-byte
characters in arguments).
.It LC_MESSAGES
Determine the locale that should be used to affect the format and
contents of diagnostic messages written to standard error and informative
messages written to standard output.
.It NLSPATH
[XSI] [Option Start] Determine the location of message catalogs for
the processing of LC_MESSAGES . [Option End]
.El

.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width
.It 0
All files were processed successfully.
.It >0
An error occurred.
.El

.Sh LEGAL

Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition, Standard for Information Technology --
Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base
Specifications Issue 6, Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by The Institute for
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc and The Open Group. In the
event of any discrepancy between this and the original IEEE and The
Open Group Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard
is the referee document. The original Standard can be obtained online
at http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html
