
.Dd December 2008
.Dt CMP 1

.Sh NAME

.Nm cmp
.Nd compare two files

.Sh SYNOPSIS

.Nm cmp
.Op Fl l | Fl s
.Ar file1 file2

.Sh DESCRIPTION
The cmp utility compares two files. The cmp utility writes no output
if the files are the same. Under default options, if they differ, it
writes to standard output the byte and line number at which the first
difference occurred. Bytes and lines are numbered beginning with 1.

.Sh OPTIONS
The cmp utility conforms to the Base Definitions volume of IEEE Std
1003.1-2001, Section 12.2, Utility Syntax Guidelines.
.Pp
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl l
(Lowercase ell.) Write the byte number (decimal) and the differing
bytes (octal) for each difference.
.It Fl s
Write nothing for differing files; return exit status only.
.El

.Sh OPERANDS
The following operands are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It file1
A pathname of the first file to be compared. If file1 is '-', the
standard input is used.
.It file2
A pathname of the second file to be compared. If file2 is '-', the
standard input is used.
.El
.Pp
If both file1 and file2 refer to standard input or refer to the same FIFO
special, block special, or character special file, the results are undefined.

.Sh STDIN
The standard input is used only if the file1 or file2 operand refers to
standard input. See the INPUT FILES section.

.Sh INPUT FILES
The input files can be any file type.

.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variables affect the execution of cmp:
.Bl -tag -width
.It LANG
Provide a default value for the internationalization variables that
are unset or null. (See the Base Definitions volume of IEEE Std 1003.1-2001,
Section 8.2, Internationalization Variables for the precedence of
internationalization variables used to determine the values of locale
categories.)
.It LC_ALL
If set to a non-empty string value, override the values of all the
other internationalization variables.
.It LC_CTYPE
Determine the locale for the interpretation of sequences of bytes of
text data as characters (for example, single-byte as opposed to multi-byte
characters in arguments).
.It LC_MESSAGES
Determine the locale that should be used to affect the format and
contents of diagnostic messages written to standard error and informative
messages written to standard output.
.It NLSPATH
[XSI] [Option Start] Determine the location of message catalogs for
the processing of LC_MESSAGES . [Option End]
.El

.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width
.It 0
The files are identical.
.It 1
The files are different; this includes the case where one file is
identical to the first part of the other.
.It >1
An error occurred.
.El


